1.3 Template file usage
=======================

Files in a Provider Extension are by convention always in this format:

```
typo3conf/ext/myproviderextension
__ Configuration
____ TypoScript
______ constants.txt
______ setup.txt
__ Resources
____ Private
______ Language
________ locallang.xlf
______ Layouts
______ Partials
______ Templates
________ Content
________ Page
____ Public
______ Javascript
______ Stylesheet
______ Images
__ ext_emconf.php
__ ext_icon.gif
__ ext_tables.php
__ ext_localconf.php
```

It should be pretty clear just from this that we _use Extbase's conventions to place configuration and template folders and files_
and that _your provider extension is simply a standard TYPO3 extension with some predefined file structure_. The way you use each
folder normally depends on which type of Provider Extension you are creating - and the feature-specific guides always start by
explaining which folders and files are involved.

Your `ext_localconf.php` and `ext_tables.php` files will contain the various calls to Flux to register which types of Flux
templates your Provider Extension uses - along with any other configuration you might need; custom TCA fields for `tt_content` fx.
The `Resources/Private` folder contains a template structure and the language file - and the templates are divided into subfolders
by name of the controller which will render them (e.g. in `fluidpages` the controller is named `PageController` which means the
folder name is `Page`, in `fluidcontent` the controller name is `Content` and so on). Layouts and Partials are supported just like
normal. And finally, the `Configuration` directory contains the TypoScript that your extension makes available for integrators to
select and use in TYPO3 when your Provider Extension is installed.

### What must the template files contain?

The actual contents of template files depends on which feature they should be used with - but there are a few shared rules which
you can read all about in the [Templates concept](../2.Templating/2.2.CreatingTemplateFiles/2.2.1.CommonFileStructure.md) chapter
of this documentation. Following the standard rules always results in a working, selectable (yet very minimal) template - what the
template should contain in addition to the standard format is up to each specific feature and is documented by each feature.

The only files which are required to contain the standard format, are the files located under `Templates` - in other words: your
Layouts and Partials can contain any content you want, but Templates must contain Flux-specific information.

### How is a Flux template different from plain Fluid?

A template file which can be used by Flux is exactly the same as a normal fluid template - but with some added requirements:

1. The namespace `{namespace flux=FluidTYPO3\Flux\ViewHelpers}` must be present.
2. There must be a `Configuration` section created using `f:section`.

Inside the `Configuration` section (or whichever name you chose, in case you chose not to follow conventions) you should place
a `flux:form` tag containing at least an `id` attribute which should have a `lowerCamelCase` value, for example `specialImage`.

There is an optional section you can add when your Flux template is going to be used with the `tt_content` table - the section
called `Preview` (again, added using `f:section`) can contain HTML output that is displayed in the page module in TYPO3 when you
view that particular record. This works automatically for Flux-enabled plugins (which includes but is not limited to elements
for use in `fluidcontent`).

The final convention - which you *should* follow for transparency but which *can* be ignored when necessary, is to name the
section which contains the actual output rendering for the frontend, `Main` - this section gets rendered from the Layout you use,
which means you can of course choose a different name if that makes sense. Using the name `Main` simply means other people will
immediately know the purpose of that section.

An extremely minimal template example (example: `fluidcontent` element template):

```xml
{namespace flux=FluidTYPO3\Flux\ViewHelpers}
<f:layout name="Content" />
<f:section name="Configuration">
    <flux:form id="myContentElement" />
</f:section>
<f:section name="Main">
    My content element
</f:section>
```

As you can see, this minimal example fulfills only the two main requirements above and uses name conventions for the Layout which
we describe in the next chapter. If added to a `fluidcontent` template collection, this template would result in one new content
element type named "myContentElement" which has no extra form fields, no special icon, no human-readable label and when rendered,
displays a simple "My content element" text without any HTML container element.

### Layouts and Partials

Just like in any other Fluid template you can use any Layout name you choose. We on the Fluid Powered TYPO3 team suggest you use
the names `Default`, `Content`, `CoreContent` and `Page` as needed. This list shows when to use which name:

* `Page` when the Layout is to be used with Page templates through `fluidpages`. It is suggested that all page templates share a
  common Layout file, but sometimes you need to add other Layouts, in which case names like `FrontPage` and `SubPage` and so on,
  will make a lot of sense to use.
* `Content` when the Layout is for `fluidcontent` elements - normally, you only need one Layout for content elements but like Page
  templates, you can split content element layouts into fx `MediaContent`, `TextContent` etc. Layout files.
* `CoreContent` when the Layout is for `fluidcontent_core` elements. You should not ever diverge from this convention for this
  particular extension - consistency and with it predicactability is **very** important for core content templates.
* `Default` when for example all your Layout file contains is an `<f:render />` statement rendering one section. If your Layout
  HTML is this simple, sharing a Layout file gives you a small performance boost and increases transparency - compiling one file
  is naturally faster than multiple files, and having one file to look at greatly increases your chance to find the right one ;)

Other than these naming conventions there are no particular rules or recommendations for Layouts set by Fluid Powered TYPO3. It is
completely up to you as developer/designer to decide what, if anything, your Layouts should contain.

Partials are completely free to be used whenever you want, for whatever you want. They can contain shared Previews, common Flux
form fields, Grid definitions etc. - you simply have to place an `f:render` statement in the right place to "include" those.

### View path definitions in TypoScript

Flux will automatically look in the default template paths - even if you don't add any configuration - but you can (and indeed you
should) add your View configuration as TypoScript. You do this the same way you do it for any Extbase/Fluid extension so we won't
cover that here.

Flux-enabled extensions will like any Extbase extension find template paths setup in `plugin.tx_yourextwithoutunderscores.view`.

Changing the view paths in TypoScript affects Flux just like it would affect any other extension. Flux will look in the new path
instead of the old one. Here it is worth noting that you can use so-called template path "overlays" - you can read more about how
these are set up, in [the documentation for EXT:view about path overlays](https://github.com/FluidTYPO3/view#template-path-overlays).
The same procedure is supported by `fluidcontent`, `fluidpages` etc. - and indeed, any extension in which you use Flux gets this
support without the need to install EXT:view. To get overlay capabilities for non-Flux extensions, simply install EXT:view and
follow the same procedure.

### Alternative to templates

> Careful! Some features from Fluid Powered TYPO3 will require template files containing a `Configuration` section and a
> `flux:form` tag. While it is possible to get around even this requirement, it involves creating a custom Provider to take the
> place of a Provider included with the extension, e.g. `fluidcontent` ContentProvider, `fluidpages` PageProvider, and so on.
> By replacing Providers you can change almost all aspects of how a certain feature works, fitting it to your site in exactly the
> right way. We designed the API so that features like `fluidcontent` all have the exact same level of API access that your own
> Providers do, which means anything these extensions can do yours can, too.

Note that there is an alternative to placing your form and fields inside the template. When you use a custom Provider class you
can have this class return PHP objects directly from the `getForm` and `getGrid` methods. Your Provider will have inherited those
two methods from Flux's `AbstractProvider` class - and in the code inherited from Flux, your Provider will by default look into
the template file for a Form and Grid instance. When you override either of these methods, reading the Form and Grid respectively,
does not have to require reading a template file.

What this means is that if you return native PHP objects from a Provider for both the Form *and* Grid instances, your template
file itself no longer is required to contain a `Configuration` section and any `flux:form` definition. Your Provider can even
return a raw HTML preview - which when done, lets you skip the `Preview` section as well. Of course, Previews only apply to
`tt_content` records as already mentioned.

To learn more about your options in this area - when and how to create cutom Provider classes - you can study our
[Provider class chapters](../3.AdvancedProviders/3.2.CustomFluxProviders/3.2.1.UseCasesProviders.md).

Continue: [Chapter 1.4: Configuration Usage](1.4.ConfigurationUsage.md).
