3.2.5 Grid
==========

The **Grid** is a structure much like an HTML table, with rows and columns that define a grid structure of cells. In Flux you can define grids inside templates by using the `flux:grid` ViewHelper and sub-ViewHelpers `flux:grid.row` and `flux:grid.column`. When a template contains a grid definition and the feature which uses the template supports grids the defined grid is used by TYPO3 (for example, `fluidpages` supports grids to define page content columns, and `fluidcontent` supports grids to define content container areas in other content elements).

> Note: the Grid ViewHelpers do not render any output, they only define a structure that is stored internally in the template parser. Their only purpose is to define Grids which are rendered by other methods.

In the context of `fluidpages` and `fluidcontent` the `flux:grid.column` defines areas that can contain content elements. In `fluidpages` the Grid becomes a so-called **backend layout** in which each **column** is identified by a number, the `colPos` value. In `fluidcontent` this value is a string name that can contain machine-readable names like `myContentArea` or `leftColumn` etc., but can of course also be a number if you so desire.

> Note: some Grid features will require the `colPos` attribute while others will require the `name`. The documentation of any feature using Grids will clearly state which is expected, but as a rule of thumb _only page template features will use the `colPos` attribute and all others will use the `name` attribute_.

The name or column position number of each column is then saved to records when they are placed into the column. Again in the context of `fluidpages` and `fluidcontent` these values are stored in fields which are defined in TCA as proper relations, enabling things like native translation of content elements inside other content elements and recursive copy/reference actions all handled by the TYPO3 core.

### An example Grid definition

The following example defines a Grid which has two rows with each two columns. The template uses column **numbering** and is intended to be used in a page template. The code piece is placed inside an `f:section` with name `Configuration` and is a sibling of the `flux:form` tag:

```xml
<f:section name="Configuration">
    <flux:form id="myForm" />
    <flux:grid>
        <flux:grid.row>
            <flux:grid.column colPos="0" label="Top left" />
            <flux:grid.column colPos="1" label="Top right" />
        </flux:grid.row>
        <flux:grid.row>
            <flux:grid.column colPos="2" label="Bottom left" />
            <flux:grid.column colPos="3" label="Bottom right" />
        </flux:grid.row>
    </flux:grid>
</f:section>
```

The resulting structure of which looks like:

```plain
|¨¨¨|¨¨¨|
|   |   |
|---|---|
|   |   |
|___|___|
```


### Controlling spans and widths

For advanced layouts with cells spanning multiple columns or rows the `colspan` and `rowspan` attributes can be used exactly like you would on an HTML table. In TYPO3, setting for example `colspan="2"` on one column and no colspan on the other, results in one column being _twice as wide as the other_. You can utilize this to control the structure's rendering:


```xml
<f:section name="Configuration">
    <flux:form id="myForm" />
    <flux:grid>
        <flux:grid.row>
            <flux:grid.column colPos="0" colspan="4" label="Top left" />
            <flux:grid.column colPos="1" rowspan="2" label="Top right" />
        </flux:grid.row>
        <flux:grid.row>
            <flux:grid.column colPos="2" colspan="4" label="Bottom left" />
        </flux:grid.row>
    </flux:grid>
</f:section>
```

Which results in this approximate rendering:

```plain
|¨¨¨¨¨¨¨¨¨¨¨|¨¨¨|
|           |   |
|-----------|   |
|           |   |
|___________|___|
```

Some implementations such as `fluidcontent` also support setting a `style` attribute on `flux:grid.column` - which then gets used as value of the `style=""` tag that represents the column when renderered.

### Shorthand

When you only require a single row and a single column with no particular setup, you may use the `flux:form.content` shorthand. The following template example illustrates the behavior of this shorthand ViewHelper:

```xml
<flux:form.content />
<!-- ...is 100% identical to but must never be mixed with... -->
<flux:grid>
    <flux:grid.row>
        <flux:grid.column name="content" colPos="0" />
    </flux:grid.row>
</flux:grid>
```

The two variants should never be used in the same template since they both use the same internal variable - the result is that only the last occurrence of either ViewHelper is used since the old variable gets overwritten.
