3.4.2 TypoScript Variables
==========================

TypoScript is the common configuration language used within the TYPO3 core itself. It comes with a few conventions to be used by every extension authors.

As using FluidTYPO3 for templating means you are essentially creating a new extension which relies on the extbase conventions, you have to stick to the pattern and can directly benfit from it.

Problem
-------
Your template ``Frontpage.html`` in provider extension ``myproject`` relies on a setting that changes a base colour scheme by attaching a class to elements.

Solution
--------
In traditional TYPO3 projects, you would have accessed a value through TypoScript constants and would have used this in a wrap. With FluidTYPO3 templating, we've got you covered by using the extbase conventions for TypoScript cascading values. The list below shows how a value is processed:

1. You set a TypoScript constant ``plugin.tx_myproject.settings.baseclass = green`` in ``Configuration/TypoScript/constants.txt``. Doing this upfront gives you the power of the constants editor in the template module and allows for easy changing of the value.
2. You import this constant into TypoScript setup: ``plugin.tx_myproject.setting.baseclass = {$plugin.tx_myproject.settings.baseclass}`` in ``Configuration/TypoScript/setup.txt``
3. You *could* override the value at any level in the page tree via constants editor
4. You *could* override the value in any flexform you create by simply naming the field ``settings.baseclass``
5. The value is available in your PageController actions for further operation/changing via ``$this->settings``.
6. The value finally pops into your template and can be accessed via ``{settings.baseclass}``

Easy huh?