3.1.2 Creating custom Flux controllers
======================================

A Flux controller is almost exactly identical to a standard ActionController in its most basic form:

```php
<?php
namespace FluidTYPO3\Fluidcontent\Controller;

use FluidTYPO3\Flux\Controller\AbstractFluxController;

/**
 * My custom ContentController to render my package's Content templates.
 *
 * @package Myextension
 * @subpackage Controller
 */
class ContentController extends AbstractFluxController {

}
```

Once created, the class will automatically be used by Fluid Powered TYPO3's features which render the `Content` type (in other
words: `fluidcontent` elements from your own package). Initially your controller will not actually perform any actions - all it
does (since having an empty class body) is become instanciated and use functions inherited from the parent class.

## Special initialisation methods

On custom Flux Controllers a few additional initialisation methods have been added in order to get a greater degree of control
and clarity over the creation of the special context Flux needs when rendering Controller actions. In order of execution, these
methods are:

1. initializeProvider, which in the base class simply sets the Controller's desired table and field name relationship.
2. initializeSettings, which in the base class fills `$this->settings` (TypoScript and Flux form variables), `$this->setup` (view
   paths from TypoScript for your extension) and `$this->data` (the Flux form variables only, excluding TS values).
3. initializeOverriddenSettings, which takes care of adjusting `$this->settings` with overrides if any should be performed.
4. initializeViewObject, which is the new counterpart to `initializeView` which is taken over by Flux - among other things it can
   set the template path and filename in the Provider if the controller explicitly defines one to use.
5. initializeViewVariables, which can be used to assign variables to your view - variables, which will be assigned in every action
   (and which can then later be re-assigned from within each Controller action).

The methods are all called from the `initializeView` method on the Flux controller class - **you should never override this class
without also either calling all the appropriate intialisation methods OR remembering to call `parent::initializeView($view)`**.
Overriding these methods (and taking a look in the original method, if necessary calling `parent::$methodName()` in the top of
your overridden method to ensure the context gets created properly) can allow you to control many detailed aspects of how your
View and variables are prepared.
