3.1.1 Use case for custom Flux Controllers
==========================================

You can opt to use a Flux-enabled controller whenever you want your controller to work more closely with your Provider class. Using
the controller base gives you automatic access to the Provider and lets the Provider deliver view variables and more. While you are
not required to use this controller base, it makes it easier to implement many view-related features. You can get the same result
by manually making your Provider instance and calling methods to read variables, template paths and other settings.

### What is a Flux-enabled Controller?

There is not much difference between a standard Extbase plugin "Action Controller" and a Flux-enabled controller. The hint lies in
the name "-enabled" which means a _Flux-enabled controller is simply an extended controller with a few added behaviors_:

* A [Provider](../3.2.CustomFluxProviders/3.2.1.UseCasesProviders.md) is resolved by Flux and made available in the controller.
* The View class is different; allowing (ViewHelperVariableContainer-)variables to be read from specific sections.
* Several initialisation methods have been added, allowing for example common template variables to be added.
* Delegation to other controller classes is possible.

Other than these additions this type of controller class is a standard controller: it supports arguments, property mapping,
validation, redirection etc. just like all other controller types.

## Custom controllers in Provider Extensions

Some features of Fluid Powered TYPO3 - such as `fluidcontent` and `fluidpages` - support custom controller classes which Flux will
use instead of the controllers that ship with each of those features. Naturally this allows much more flexibility (as an example,
a custom `PageController` can accept custom arguments in the action that corresponds to the template that gets rendered). If and
when you add custom controller classes the location and naming of these also must follow Extbase conventions:

```
typo3conf/ext/myproviderextension
__ Classes
____ Controller
______ PageController.php
______ ContentController.php

```

TODO: FINISH CHAPTER