2.1 Installing from Github
==========================

First, a general note about our branching strategy: we use a `development`, `staging` and `master` branch strategy which briefly
described means that __the master branch contains stable releases, the staging (and/or legacy, see full description) contains code
being built for new releases - and the development branch contains all new features and major changes which will be merged into
stable releases when completed.__ You can find the full description of this branch strategy in our
[Git strategy chapter](../5.Appendix/5.3.GitWorkflow.md), but the essense is: when our extensions depend on each other and you
use the git repositories, you must make sure to check out the same branches on all repositories. for example if you downloaded
Flux's `development` branch, then `fluidcontent` and others should also be downloaded from the `development` branch.

To install Fluid Powered TYPO3 extensions from Github you have two possible approaches:

## Using CLI commands

Direct usage of the repositories is by far the easiest approach. Simply clone the repository you desire into your `typo3conf/ext/`
folder as such (command executed from your site's root folder):

```bash
git clone "https://github.com/FluidTYPO3/flux.git" typo3conf/ext/flux
```

Which will check out the `master` branch (the stable version, in sync with the TYPO3 extension repository versions). You can then
check out the branch you need, for example if you require the `development` branch:

```bash
cd typo3conf/ext/flux; git checkout development
```

Alternatively (but not supported by all versions of git) you can directly check out only a single branch:

```bash
git clone "https://github.com/FluidTYPO3/flux.git" typo3conf/ext/flux \
--single-branch --branch development
```

And finally, in order to limit the download size and time required to resolve deltas - which makes sense when you do not require
this information, which is usually only required by contributors or the repository owners - you can add `--depth 1` to your CLI
command to perform a _shallow clone_ which has no history beyond the last commit added:


```bash
git clone "https://github.com/FluidTYPO3/flux.git" typo3conf/ext/flux \
--single-branch --branch development --depth 1
```

This approach is also essential when performing [unassisted installs using Git (or Composer)](2.4.UnassistedInstallation.md).

## Using zipped branches or releases

Github allows downloading repository branches as on-the-fly zip archives, which means you can browse on Github to the repository
and branch you want, then click the "Download zip archive" in the right side menu. Releases (which correspond to versions uploaded
to the TYPO3 extension repository) are put under "releases" (Github shows a link with a total count of releases alongside the
links to commit and branch lists in the header of the repository's home page).

Download the extensions' files the way you prefer, then extract them into folders inside `typo3conf/ext/` of your TYPO3 site.
Be careful - depending on how you download the files, the folder that gets extracted may not have the correct name, in which case
you simply rename the folder before installing the extension. Then use the extension manager to install the extensions like you
would any other extension.

**Note: any dependency extensions which you do not manually download, will be downloaded through the extension repository and may
not match your manually downloaded version! To avoid this, make sure you manually download all dependencies of each extension.**
